 # LITA_CAPSTONE_PROJECT-1-2024
## PROJECT TITLE: SALES PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR A RETAIL STORE 
### PROJECT OVERVIEW
The objective of this project is to analyze a retail store's sales performance by examining the sales data to identify key insights, including best-selling products, performance by region, and trends in monthly sales. The end goal is to create an interactive Power BI dashboard that showcases these insights.

### DATA SOURCE 
The primary data source for this analysis is the sales data collected from various retail outlets over a specified period. Additional data sources may include customer feedback, market trends, and competitor analysis.

### KEY COMPONENTS
1. **Data Collection:** Gather and consolidate sales data from various retail outlets
2. **Data Cleaning:** Clean and preprocess the data to ensure accuracy and consistency
3. **Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA):** Conduct exploratory analysis to understand the distribution, relationships, and outliers in the data
4. **Sales Trend Analysis:** Analyze sales trends over time, by product category, and geographical regions
5. **Customer Segmentation:** Identify customer segments based on purchasing behavior and demographics
6. **Sales Forecasting:** Use statistical techniques to predict future sales trends and patterns
7. **Recommendations:** Provide actionable insights and recommendations based on the analysis to enhance sales performance and profitability

### TOOLS 
Utilize tools such as:  
- Microsoft Excel: Data Manipulation and Visualization.  
- SQL:  Data Manipulation 
- POWER BI: Data manipulation and Visualization.

### TIMELINE: 
Provide a timeline for each phase of the project, including data collection, cleaning, analysis, and reporting.

### DELIVERABLES:  
The final deliverable will be a comprehensive retail sales analysis report including Visualizations, Insights, and actionable Recommendations for key stakeholders.
## MICROSOFT EXCEL

### Sales Trend Analysis: 
Analyze sales trends over time, by product category, and geographical regions

- **AVERAGE SALES PER PRODUCT** : Identifying which products are driving revenue growth and which are underperforming is crucial. This information aids the company in making informed decisions regarding product development, marketing strategies, inventory management, and overall business performance. Moreover, it can reveal valuable trends and patterns that inform future strategic planning and decision-making.
  **FORMULA USED**

  ```MICROSOFT EXCEL
  =AVERAGEIF(C2:C50001,"GLOVES",G2:G50001)

  RESULT: This gives the average sales made on GLOVES.

- **TOTAL REVENUE PER PRODUCT** : To assess the overall contribution of each product to the company's total revenue, calculating the revenue generated by each product is essential. This enables the company to understand how revenue is distributed across different products and to identify which ones are the main drivers of revenue. Such insights can guide strategic decisions, such as concentrating on high-performing products, identifying cross-selling or upselling opportunities, and optimizing pricing strategies. Additionally, it can aid in pinpointing products that are underperforming or not meeting revenue expectations, leading to informed decisions about whether to allocate more resources to those products or to discontinue them. Overall, this analysis provides valuable insights into the performance of the product portfolio, helping companies to optimize their product mix to maximize revenue and profitability.
  
  **FORMULA USED**
  ```MICROSOFT EXCEL
 =SUMIF(C2:C50003,"JACKET",H2:H50003)

**RESULT:** This gives the total sales made on JACKET.

- **TOTAL REVENUE BY REGION**: Understanding the geographical distribution of a company's revenue is crucial for assessing the performance of different regions in contributing to the overall revenue. By analyzing total revenue by region, it's possible to pinpoint which areas are the primary revenue generators and which may be lagging. Such insights enable a company to make strategic decisions about where to focus growth efforts, how to allocate resources efficiently, and ways to refine market strategies. Additionally, this analysis can shed light on regional trends, customer preferences, competitive dynamics, and potential market opportunities, aiding in the customization of marketing, sales, and distribution strategies to meet the needs of customers across various regions and contribute to the company's overall business expansion. In essence, analyzing total revenue by region equips companies with a detailed understanding of their geographic revenue streams, facilitating informed, data-driven decisions that enhance market presence and promote sustained growth.

  **FORMULA USED**
  ``` MICROSOFT EXCEL
=SUMIF(D2:D50001,"NORTH",H2:H50001)

  **RESULT** This represents the total sales generated from NORTH REGION.
  
  ## SQL (STRUCTURED QUERY LANGUAGE) : DATA MANIPULATION
  **CLEANING OF IMPORTED DATA**
  **Changing column headings**
  ```SQL
SELECT PRODUCT AS
PRODUCT_NAME
FROM DBO_SALESDATA$
  **CALCULATING FOR TOTAL SALES FOR EACH PRODUCT CATEGORIES**
  ``` SQL
SELECT PRODUCT
SUM(SALES) AS TOTAL_SALES
FROM DBO_SALESDATA$
GROUP BY PRODUCT
 ```SQL

  
